Hi, there. My name is Randy Fay. I'm one
of the maintainers of the DDEV
project. DDEV is a local development
environment for
web developers, and we're gonna just show
how to do it.
We're gonna try to set up DDEV on Linux
all the
way to using it in 10 minutes. So let's
see how we do
here. Uh, it is 8:40. We'll see how we do.
Okay, first of all, I went to
https://ddev.com/get-started, and it
automatically shows me being on Linux,
uh,
platform. And what we're gonna do is we're
going to install Docker CE
first, so let me just open the Docker
instructions. And I'm gonna go down and
here's their apt repository. I'm
going to paste that
here.
Okay, so now we'll do apt install
docker-ce.
That's got Docker now set up for us.
There's not
much to do here. If I do a sudo docker ps,
it will work,
but we haven't enabled our regular user to
use it.
We have to do the post-install action,
which is pretty easy.
Uh, let's just take a look
here.
Here's their post-installation action, and
it's just adding the user
to, adding the user's privilege to run
Docker.
So, I'm gonna paste that here. It's just
sudo
usermod, uh, docker on my user. Uh,
normally you would have to reboot or log
out and then log back in again,
but I'm just gonna say "newgroup docker".
And now I can just do a
"docker ps" and Docker is all working for
me. So we've done the
first step now. Let's go back to the Get
Started page.
We've installed Docker. Now we'll install
DDEV. So,
let's go ahead and copy this section here.
This is also in the DDEV docs at
https://docs.ddev.com, which is
fine. So, let's paste
that.
Now "ddev --version" should show us the
current stable
version of DDEV, and it does. So, our
third step here is to do a "mkcert
-install". mkcert is
DDEV's magic that lets you use HTTPS, use
trusted HTTPS, on your machine. It tells
your browser to
accept the DDEV certificates.
So there is our, uh, there is our setup,
and
let's go ahead and create a project. What
I'm going to do
is I'm going to... I always put my
projects in a workspace
folder, and I'm just gonna check
out a standard Drupal project that I'm
always working with.
It's just a Drupal 11 project and I'm just
gonna check it out,
and then we're going to use it.
So, here I can do a DDEV config, and
it's going to use the folder name as the
project name.
It automatically detected the docroot,
which is web,
and it automatically detected the Drupal
11, um,
code base there. So, now we can do a DDEV
start. So we will do a "ddev start". Now
this
is going to download the images, the
Docker images,
which... it's a one-time, it's a one-time
thing. You usually only have to do this
when you're upgrading DDEV or the first
time you use it.
So, here we are. Um, we'll say yes, we can
send, uh, instrumentation up, and here it
is pulling the
images. This takes a couple of minutes,
but again,
this is usually only on first install or
upgrade or if you're using
some different, some different thing
than you,
uh, were using on previous projects. So,
uh, this is pretty fast internet. It might
take a little longer if you have slower
internet or whatever, but,
uh...It
does a little customization in the images
to put your user- username
and user ID in there, so that you can work
inside the container with the same exact
username and UID. So that's what it means
when it says,
"Building project images." It's building
images specifically for you.
Now, this project has an automatic "ddev
composer install" on start.
I forgot about that, but I'll- I'll show
you that anyway.
Um... (keyboard clicking) Normally, you
would do a ddev
composer install on a on a PHP
project that had
Composer. Um, that runs Composer and PHP
inside the project. Since our, since our
hook did that automatically,
we were all set. So, we have got our
project installed.
Now, we're six minutes in on a brand new
machine, and,
uh, let's just go ahead and try this out
and see what happens.
I'm going to do a "ddev launch", um, and that
will launch,
Firefox here. And here is
the Drupal install screen. So, I'm going
to... And you see that it's got, uh,
trusted HTTPS here,
because, uh, DDEV does that with mkcert. And I'm gonna do the,
uh, the nice demo version of this. Here is
Drupal being
installed. Takes no time at all. Uh, Linux
is
super fast with this. I'll just put the
things here that DDEV
wants, that, uh, Drupal
wants.
(keyboard clicking)
And...
So, here it is. It's all set up. Our
project is running,
and we've got all the normal things that
we would expect to have.
This is just an ordinary, uh, demo, uh,
Drupal 11
site. So, there we are. Uh, we're gonna...
Now, we're going to
install PhpStorm and do a little Xdebug
with this,
so that we can do step debugging, which is
critical for any developer.
So, I am going to go here,
and I'm going to do a sudo snap
install --classic
PhpStorm.
And what we're gonna do is just use
PhpStorm like any developer would use,
and we're going to, uh, set a breakpoint.
Uh, we'll just use the index.php of this
project, but we're gonna set a breakpoint,
and we're gonna have PhpStorm listen, and
we're gonna tell DDEV to turn
on Xdebug, because we need to be able to
s- step through our
project and understand what it's doing and
why. Uh,
Snap is a little slower getting PhpStorm
than usual
right now, so I'll try to be patient. But
this is,
uh, this is the easy stuff.
Um, just a reminder here, I'll
just open another window. Um, our
project is right here in
workspace.d11, and we have, in the
web directory, we have an index.php, which
drives all of
this. And, of course, the vendor
directory has been populated by our, our
Composer
install, which was done inside the
container.
And our PhpStorm is ready. I should've
done
a PhpStorm Amper, but I didn't. Um, here
we are.
We have read it very carefully.
And now we're gonna open this project. I
don't, don't know what the input
thing is, but I'm gonna do it anyway. Here
we are.
Here's the workspace directory. Here's
d11. I'm gonna select
that. I'm gonna trust projects in my
workspace
folder. And here we
are. We see our project. Um,
we are... See our project. Here's the web
directory.
And I'm going to open the index.php.
And I'm just gonna make a breakpoint here.
So, here's my
breakpoint. That's where I wanna stop. Of
course, you would be doing something more
sophisticated in your project that you're
studying, your module or
whatever. And now I can, um,
I can click the, uh, start listening for
PHP debug
connections. So, I'm gonna tell, tell it
to start listening.
I have to get my, uh... Sorry, I have to
get that
out of the way of the re- actual recording
software.
So...
And I wanna turn on the, um... I don't, I
don't need to validate,
'cause with DDEV everything's working. So,
here it is.
It's listening. And in DDEV,
uh, I'm going to just,
um...I'm gonna do a DDEV-xdebug on,
(keyboard clicking) telling
DDEV to use that. And now we'll go back
and visit our
project. Just go to the home directory.
And here,
uh, PhpStorm recognized that that was
going on,
immediately caught it. Now, the first time
you do this,
it has to map your code to the code inside
the
container. And you see the code inside the
ca-container is at
var/www/html. And it says, "Well, what is
it
on the, on the, on the host?" And it's
this
right here, workspace-d11/web/index.php.
So I'm gonna
accept that, and here we are. We
have, uh, we are in PhpStorm. It has
stopped at the line
that I set the break point on. And here, I
can see all
of the variables that are here, and I can
step through
this. So I'll step through with an F8, um,
and I can step
in. I can step into each of these
functions. So what
we've done is in, oh, maybe I took 13
minutes. We started with a
plain vanilla, uh, a plain vanilla
pro- uh, uh, Ubuntu system with nothing
installed on it.
We installed Docker. We installed DDEV. We
installed
PhpStorm. We installed a Drupal 11 project
and did the
composer install on it. We ran through the
installation,
and then we, uh, debugged it with
PhpStorm. So
that's, uh, that's Linux, DDEV,
10 minutes, sort of. It was, it was kinda
10 minutes,
but we did a lot in 13 minutes. So we, we
invite you to join
us, uh, DDEV.com, docs.DDEV.com. Join us
in
Discord. We'll have all of this in the, in
the recording and the blog post
that goes with it. Thanks for joining
today.